+++
title = "Consistent Development Environments With Nix"
draft = true
+++

_How basic usage of Nix's `nix-shell` command makes it easy to create
consistent, declarative, version-controlled development environments._

---

Nearly every software project depends on packages.

Many of these packages are provided by your programming language's build tool:
specified in a configuration file (e.g. `package.json`, `Gemfile`, etc.), and
installed locally for your project.

This is ideal:

- Packages installed locally don't have conflicts with other projects
- Developers all use the correct versions for each project
- Configuration files are checked into version control
- No out-of-band configuration needed for CI

However, these projects also depend on system packages: compilers/interpreters,
build tools, databases, C libraries, etc. Even if you aren't connecting to a
database or calling C code, you still depend on system packages: you need a
compiler or interpreter to run your code!

These system packages are usually installed via your operating system's package
manager (e.g. `brew`, `apt`, etc.), which installs them in a global context
(either per-user or system-wide).

This quickly becomes a problem:

- Different projects depend on different versions of system packages, but the
system can only have one version installed globally at a time
- Developers use different versions of system packages than their peers
(packages could be too old from not updating, too new from a fresh update, etc.)
- System package versions are not checked into version control
- CI must be configured out-of-band from your build tool

In the best case, these discrepancies cause confusion and waste time, and in a
worse case, they are responsible for critical bugs and loss of user data.

So how can we make our development environments more consistent? How can we
localize these globally-installed system dependencies to their respective
projects, specify their versions explicitly in version control, and get all
developers on the same page?

## Solution

TODO

The [Nix package manager / build tool][nix] provides the `nix-shell` command,
a tool which makes declaratively specifying development environments easy.

which starts an interactive shell with packages you specify in the `PATH`.

`nix-shell` makes it
easy to declaratively specify a development environment that is consistent
across space and time.

is easy to use but has a high power-to-weight ratio. It 

Proper use of the `nix-shell` tool guarantees all developers use the correct
version of your project's dependencies, no matter the state of their system.


## Ad-hoc

Entering a Nix shell with `nodejs` and `postgresql` is a simple one-liner:

```shell
$ nix-shell --packages nodejs postgresql
```

```shell
/tmp/nix-shell $ command -v node || echo "not installed"
not installed

/tmp/nix-shell $ command -v postgres || echo "not installed"
not installed

/tmp/nix-shell $ nix-shell --packages nodejs postgresql

[nix-shell:/tmp/nix-shell]$ command -v node
/nix/store/pjacii8rznr3igdv433a4na0g2y3nxxf-nodejs-14.15.3/bin/node

[nix-shell:/tmp/nix-shell]$ command -v postgres
/nix/store/gbsbv45rxklk3mhdld1dil5g142l9gr7-postgresql-11.10/bin/postgres

[nix-shell:/tmp/nix-shell]$ node --version
v14.15.3

[nix-shell:/tmp/nix-shell]$ postgres --version
postgres (PostgreSQL) 11.10

[nix-shell:/tmp/nix-shell]$ exit

/tmp/nix-shell $
```

## Basic

```nix
# shell.nix

let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};

in
  pkgs.mkShell {
    buildInputs = [
      pkgs.nodejs
      pkgs.postgresql
    ];
  }
```

## Pinned

```nix
# nixpkgs.nix

let
  # master on 2020-12-30
  rev = "9b78f36021b3530773c4a2136c26862d32aef3f6";

  nixpkgs =
    builtins.fetchTarball {
      name = "nixpkgs";
      url = "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/${rev}.tar.gz";
      sha256 = "1b2apazjm9n4phh6gvq9dw6x6ziklvvqahz7wy5gmbmyaxk8yf1g";
    };

in
  import nixpkgs
```

```nix
# shell.nix

let
  pkgs = import ./nixpkgs.nix {};

in
  pkgs.mkShell {
    buildInputs = [
      pkgs.nodejs
      pkgs.postgresql
    ];
  }
```

When updating the Git revision of your pinned Nixpkgs, the easiest way to
find the new SHA256 hash is by entering something wrong and waiting for Nix to
correct you. Attempting to enter the shell with the wrong hash will cause Nix to
complain and give you the right answer:

```
/tmp/nix-shell $ nix-shell
unpacking 'https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/014440d7105ce2be945b79dc957dd08720a9c029.tar.gz'...
error: hash mismatch in file downloaded from 'https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/014440d7105ce2be945b79dc957dd08720a9c029.tar.gz':
  wanted: sha256:0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
  got:    sha256:0wp96yyjly3m46r6xp239q6xy1iwbg5nyqih7g2k2m17bi3pbi9r
```

## Usage

[nix]: https://nixos.org
